# Introduction

`jankscripten` is a compiler and runtime system that targets WebAssembly
and supports multiple front-end languages:

  - JankyScript is a language with JavaScript syntax. It supports
    higher-order functions and a standard library that is similar to
    JavaScript. The compiler translates JankyScript to
    <span class="smallcaps">NotWasm</span> by performing type inference
    and closure conversion.

  - <span class="smallcaps">NotWasm</span> is an explicitly-typed
    lower-level language that does not support higher-order functions.
    However, it does support:
    
      - Garbage collection: at the moment, a simple mark-and-sweep
        collector with a stop-and-copy region for floating point
        numbers.
    
      - String values: Worth mentioning, since WebAssembly does not
        support strings natively.
    
      - Any-typed values (a.k.a. type dynamic): a failed downcast
        crashes the program with an unrecoverable error (i.e., a
        WebAssembly trap).
    
      - Monotonic dynamic objects with prototype inheritance: The fields
        of these objects are of type Any, and new fields may be added
        dynamically. However, these objects *do not support field
        deletion*. Field lookup in dynamic objects is optimized using
        inline caching.
    
      - Hash tables and arrays: these store Any-typed values.
    
      - Explicit closures: Although
        <span class="smallcaps">NotWasm</span> does not support
        higher-order functions, it has a representation for closures
        (i.e., code + environment pointer) which is designed to fit into
        Any-typed values.
    
      - ML-style mutable references

JankyScript is *not JavaScript*. It makes several simplifying
assumptions, which it inherits from
<span class="smallcaps">NotWasm</span>. However, as long as you’re
working with “sane” JavaScript, e.g., JavaScript generated by a compiler
from a saner programming language, you can use JankyScript. With more
effort, you can instead use <span class="smallcaps">NotWasm</span> as an
intermediate language for a compiler that targets WebAssembly.

# Prerequisites and Building

#### Prerequites

`jankscripten` is written in Rust, and uses the Rust WebAssembly
toolchain. It depends on Rust packages that link to *libssl* on Linux,
and it relies on the Z3 SMT Solver. Finally, the test suite relies on
Node. Follow these steps to install the prerequisites:

1.  Install the [Rust toolchain](https://rustup.rs/). **We require Rust
    1.51.0 (released March 2021).** More recent versions of Rust changed
    the ABI of the WebAssembly backend. We will fix this soon. After
    installing Rust, run the following commands:
    
        rustup toolchain add 1.51.0
        rustup default 1.51.0

2.  Install [Node](https://nodejs.org/en/). We require Node 11 or
    higher.

3.  Install the Rust WebAssembly toolchain:
    
        rustup target add wasm32-unknown-unknown

4.  Install the Wasm-Bindgen CLI, to allow Rust unit tests to run in
    WebAssembly:
    
        cargo install wasm-bindgen-cli

5.  On Ubuntu Linux, install *libssl* and *pkg-config*:
    
        sudo apt-get install libssl-dev pkg-config

6.  Install the Z3 library. On Ubuntu Linux:
    
        sudo apt-get install libz3-dev

#### Building

1.  Build the `jankscripten` compiler:
    
        cargo build

2.  Build the `jankscripten` runtime\[1\]:
    
        (cd runtime && cargo build)

3.  Build the integration testing tool:
    
        (cd integration_tests && npm install)

#### Testing

    cargo test
    (cd runtime && cargo test) # Runs tests using WebAssembly
    (cd integration_tests && npx jest)

# Running

To compile `filename.ext` to WebAssembly:

    ./bin/jankscripten compile filename.ext

**NOTE:** The supported extensions are .js and .notwasm.

To run a compiled WebAssembly program with the jankscripten runtime:

    ./bin/run-node filename.wasm

# Debugging

To debug or profile a compiled WebAssembly program:

    node --inspect-brk bin/run FILENAME.wasm

The Chrome debugger uses source maps correctly to show the original Rust
code. You can use Visual Studio Code or Edge, but source maps do not
appear to work correctly. See the [Node Debugging
Guide](https://nodejs.org/en/docs/guides/debugging-getting-started/) for
more information.

1.  This is a separate step because it targets WebAssembly and not
    native code
